---
output:
  html_document: default
  pdf_document: default
---
# <Repository Title>
<Instructions: copy and paste this template into your project README file (found in the parent folder of the repository). Fill in relevant information as requested.>

<General notes: add as much information as is relevant for your repository. Some overarching guidelines are provided, but feel free to expand on these guidelines.>
<More resources found here: https://www.dataone.org/all-best-practices>
<Delete the text inside the brackets when formatting your file.>

## Summary

<describe the purpose of this repository, the information it contains, and any relevant analysis goals. What, why, where, when, how?>

The 2021 Texas winter storm was a severe and unprecedented cold weather event that caused widespread power outages and significant damage across the state due to a combination of extreme temperatures (as low as -2°F/-19°C ) and infrastructure failures. 

Our team wishes to study the trend of occurrence of extreme low temperature events in Texas, and how does these events correlate with the local energy demand and electricity price. Using historical data, we hope to predict the grid demand for future extreme cold days for preparedness, increasing local resilience and energy security in winter.

The main research questions we are trying to answer are:
1. How did the frequency of extreme cold days changed in the past 8 years in Texas? How did local energy demand and electricity price changed in these extreme cold days?
2.  If following the past trend, how much energy will be demanded for preparing extreme cold days in 2024 and 2025?

## Investigators

<name(s), affiliation(s), contact information, roles (if applicable)>

Judy Hua Zhu
hua.zhu@duke.edu

Rosie Wu
rosie.wu@duke.edu

Zhaoxin Zhang
zhaoxin.zhang@duke.edu 

Master of Environmental Management
Duke Nicholas School of Environment

## Keywords
<add relevant keywords here>

Extreme temperature, cold climate, electricity load, electricity price


## Database Information

<describe the origin of all data in the repository, including data collected from outside sources and new data generated by the investigator(s). If data was accessed from an outside database, the date(s) of data access should also be included.>

 Data used for this analysis is from different sources. 
 
 Historical records of temperature were found in the archive API https://archive-api.open-meteo.com/v1/era5. Given the information on Texas's latitude and longitude and the start and end dates from January 2016 to December 2023, the API archive could provide data on daily temperature in Texas from 2016 to 2023. The API gave the maximum and minimum temperatures in Texas from 2016 to 2023 in degrees Celsius. 

Data from outside sources: 

 In the Raw folder under the Data folder, there are two sub-folders: EnergyLoad_ercot and EnergyPrice. EnergyLoad_ercot: The Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) gave hourly energy load data in Texas, from year 2016 to 2023, in MW. EnergyPrice: The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) contained monthly average electricity price data in cent/kwh from 2001 to 2024. The data for daily electricity prices was unavailable.
 
 All of the data from the three sources used in this analysis had a date column, which could ensure the time series analysis's viability. The data had continuous data on daily temperature, hourly load, and monthly price, which would be used for both time series and linear model analysis. All of the outside data listed above was accessed and retrieved in November 2024.
 
 The Raw data were all wrangled in the Data_Wrangling rmd file and the exported csv files are stored in the Processed folder under the Data folder. 
 

## Folder structure, file formats, and naming conventions 

<describe the folders contained in the repository, including what type of files they contain>
<describe the formats of files for the various purposes contained in the repository>
<describe your file naming conventions>

 We have 3 general folders: Data, Data Wrangling & Analysis, Report
- Data folder: this folder contains csv data in 2 categories. Processed data: extracted and wrangled. Raw: data extracted directly from online searching or scrapping
- Data Wrangling & Analysis folder: this folder contains rmd files for data wrangling (which output were exported to Processed Data folder) and analysis process (Time Series, Linear Modeling, Visualizations)
- Report folder: Our final project report rmd file and html output is located in this folder.


## Metadata

<For each data file in the repository, describe the data contained in each column. Include the column name, a description of the information, the class of data, and any units associated with the data. Create a list or table for each data file.> 

## Scripts and code

<list any software scripts/code contained in the repository and a description of their purpose.>

